User Manual


Instructions:


1) Go to careernet.ml


2) Go to either job seeker/job provider web portal depending on who you want to log in as


3) Sign up for the Services


4) Once you have registered you should see a log in page


5) Log in to the website


The following is instructions for job seekers who are logged in.


6a) If you login as a job seeker you will be allowed to browse through all the jobs and record the job that interests you.


7a) As you choose the job or set filters your filters get recorded and is shown in the summary which is editable.


8a) Once you finalise your filters you will be asked to upload your resume 


9a) Once you upload your resume the resume gets converted and split into skills, name, contact details, employment history, 
project history etc. Check and edit all that is required. Press next to go to next page.


10a) In the next page it gives you a summary of all the skills and years of experience you have in those skills. Edit and add
more skills if needed. You can also give a description as to which educational institution or employment you acquired those
skills. You can also provide documents confirming those skills such as certificates or work references who can endorse your 
skills. Press next to go to the next page.


11a) Here you can customize your cover letter to for the job application.


12a) Once you hit submit it automatically applies for the jobs you shortlisted depending on the job providers filters. It will
give you a summary of all the jobs applied for and the jobs that the provider has filtered out. It will also apply for similar
jobs that matches both your criteria as well as job providers criteria. 


13a) At the end of the summery it will ask if you want to opt for an automatic search and apply service for the next 30 or 90
days for a fee. Also, it will allow you to change filter.


The following is instructions for job provider who are logged in.


6b) If you login as a job provider you will be allowed to post a job.


7b) As you choose the post the job or set filters it gives the number of candidates available for those jobs. It also gives
the average earnings for those jobs. It also gives out the number of similar jobs listed so that a gap analysis is possible
and filter can be set to attract a number of applicants. 
